---
description: >-
  The goal of this tutorial is to learn how to calibrate the temperature
  settings for each Smart Sleeve in a 16 vial eVOLVER setup
---

# Temperature Calibration

## About

**Why are temperature calibrations important?**

Microorganism have their own unique culture temperature requirements. Temperature can affect the successful cultivation and growth characteristics of the culture. By using a simple thermistor and heating resistor, we can quantify, track, and modulate the temperature of the liquid culture over time.

**Why is calibration necessary?**

Readings sent from the Raspberry Pi to the computer/server are the raw voltage values measured by the Arduino across the thermistor, which changes as a function of the temperature. To make sense of the readings in terms of values we understand, we need a calibration file that converts this to degrees - celsius.

**Do I need to redo temperature calibration if I switch out a thermistor/resistor pair?**

Yes. Variability exists across the individual thermistor and heating resistor elements, necessitating a new temperature calibration anytime one of these parts are replaced. This is why the calibration curve is unique to each smart sleeve calibrated.

## Materials

* 16 eVOLVER vials filled with 15mL water
* Thermometer with probes
  * Do not use a thermocouple-based thermometer, as the magnetic field from the stir components can interefere with measurements
  * _We use the "_[Fisherbrand™ Traceable™ Excursion-Trac™ Datalogging Thermometers](https://www.fishersci.com/shop/products/fisher-scientific-traceable-excursion-trac-datalogging-thermometers-7/15081124)"
* eVOLVER Electron GUI
  * This tutorial is for the newest version of the eVOLVER Electron App (Release 2.0.1), which enables data visualization between each temperature calibration step (RT -> +10C -> +20C). For older versions of the Electron GUI, additional notes are provided at the bottom to successfully complete the calibration - the process remains largely the same.
* eVOLVER

## Methods

1. Turn on the eVOLVER 5V power supply. Wait 5 seconds. Turn on the eVOLVER 12V power supply.
2. Open up the eVOLVER Electron GUI app, and ensure you are connected to the correct eVOLVER you wish to calibrate in the upper-right hand corner of the "Home Screen". The circle should be solid green, indicating that the eVOLVER is connected.
3. Tap "Setup" in the GUI home screen, select all vials by tapping "Select All" in the bottom right corner. The vial circles should highlight orange. Tap the "Next ->" button in the upper right-hand box (which includes all the control parameters) until you reach the "Temperature" tab. Drag the slider all the way down to "20C". Tap the button, and the "Executed Commands" box in the lower right should indicate that a temp command was sent to all vials.
4. Place all the eVOLVER vials, pre-filled with 15mL of water, into the Smart Sleeves.
5. Go back to the "Home Screen", click "Calibrations" and then "Temp" in the eVOLVER Electron App.
6. Name the calibration, hit enter, and then click "Start Temperature Calibration".
7. **Room Temperature:** Wait \~15-30 minutes for the temperature of the water to equilibrate to ambient room temperature (and heat generated by the eVOLVER).
   * Generally, there are two ways to determine if the vial water has reached temperature equilibrium.
   * \[1] Place the thermometer probes into the water, clear the "Min/Max" readings, and wait until the reads no longer display fluctuations within a minute of waiting.
   * \[2] The eVOLVER Electron GUI has an in-built function that displays the change in thermistor value from the last read, shown as a (+/-) value in brackets next to the current thermistor value being read. The GUI uses this information to determine whether the vials have equilibrated across time, shown as an orange circle indicator around each vial circle on the GUI that should turn fully orange upon equilibration.
     * &#x20;**Importantly**, sometimes the vials will not display the achievement of equilibrium correctly. Please use your discretion with respect to the time elapsed under heat, similarity of temperature measured by thermometer across vials, and the GUI equilibrium function to determine when equilibrium has been reached.
8. Once equilibrated, measure the temperature of each vial with the thermometer probe and log the temperature measurements in Celsius in the Electron GUI.
9. Press the "RT :arrow\_forward:" button and wait for the eVOLVER to measure the thermistor values (the eVOLVER measures the thermistor values continuously for a minute, with an orange ring appearing around the :arrow\_forward: button. Once complete, the GUI should display "1/3 Measurements made"
10. **Room Temperature +10C:** Once complete, click the " +10C ->" button, and then click the "RT +10C :arrow\_forward:". The GUI should display "Temperature set. Let equilibrate"
11. Wait 60-120 minutes for the temperature of the water to equilibrate. Use the system outlined in Step 7 to establish when the temperature has equilibrated, or leave overnight to be certain.
12. Once equilibrated, measure the temperature of each vial with the thermometer probe and log the temperature measurements in Celsius in the Electron GUI. Press the "RT +10C :arrow\_forward:" button and wait for the eVOLVER to measure the thermistor values. Once complete, the GUI should display "2/3 measurements made"
13. **Room Temperature +20C:** Once complete, click the " +20C ->" button, and then click the "RT +20C :arrow\_forward:". The GUI should display "Temperature set. Let equilibrate"
14. Wait \~120 minutes, or leave overnight.
15. Once equilibrated, measure the temperature of each vial with the thermometer probe and log the temperature measurements in Celsius in the Electron GUI. Press the "RT +20C :arrow\_forward:" button and wait for the eVOLVER to measure the thermistor values. Once complete, the GUI should display "3/3 measurements made"
16. **Calibrate:** An edit icon button should appear once all 3 measurements have been made. Click on the button, and a graph of the linear calibration curves for all thermistors across the smart sleeves should appear. Please confirm that the curves look linear. If everything looks good, please exit out of the graph, and voila! You have completed your Temperature Calibration!



